Add a Performance guide for Server Timing (#25575)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/performance_api/server_timing/index.md

---
title: Server timing
slug: Web/API/Performance_API/Server_timing
page-type: guide
---

{{DefaultAPISidebar("Performance API")}}

> Server Timing is part of the Performance API and allows servers to communicate metrics about the request-response cycle to the user agent. This allows you to collect and act on server-side metrics in the same way as all the other metrics processed with the Performance API.

Reviewer: - How about rephrasing "This allows" to clarify what "This" is and I am guessing we mean "enables" here instead of "allows"

```suggestion
Server timing is a part of the Performance API and allows servers to communicate metrics about the request-response cycle to the user agent. You can collect this information and act on server-side metrics in the same way as all the other metrics processed with the Performance API.
```

## Sending server metrics

> The {{HTTPHeader("Server-Timing")}} HTTP header is used to surface any backend server timing metrics. For example, you might want to send database read/write operation times, CPU time, file system access etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {{HTTPHeader("Server-Timing")}} HTTP header is used to surface any backend server timing metrics. For example, you might want to send database read/write operation times, CPU time, and file system access.
```

> You can send metrics with or without values. They can optionally contain a description. It is advised to keep names, description and data as short as possible to minimize the HTTP overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can send metrics with or without values. The metrics can optionally contain a description. It is advised to keep names, descriptions, and data as short as possible to minimize the HTTP overhead.
```

> Example `Server-Timing` headers:

Reviewer: should this be a heading "Examples"? or if not heading, something like this:

```suggestion
Examples of `Server-Timing` headers:
```

```http
// Single metric without value
Server-Timing: missedCache

// Single metric with value
Server-Timing: cpu;dur=2.4

// Single metric with description and value
Server-Timing: cache;desc="Cache Read";dur=23.2

> // Two metrics with value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Two metrics with values
```

Server-Timing: db;dur=53, app;dur=47.2

// Server-Timing as trailer
Trailer: Server-Timing
--- response body ---
Server-Timing: total;dur=123.4
```

> To calculate real server-side metrics, consult the documentation of your server-side CMS, framework, or programming language for how to measure performance within the backend application. If your server uses Node.js, the performance measurement APIs will look very familiar to the Performance API in browsers as the Node.js perf module is a of a subset of the W3C Web Performance APIs as well as additional APIs for Node.js-specific performance measurements. See the [Node.js performance documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/perf_hooks.html#performance-measurement-apis) for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To calculate real server-side metrics, consult the documentation of your server-side CMS, framework, or programming language for how to measure performance within the backend application. If your server uses Node.js, the performance measurement APIs will look very familiar to the Performance API in browsers as the Node.js performance module is a subset of the W3C Web Performance APIs as well as additional APIs for Node.js-specific performance measurements. See the [Node.js performance documentation] (https://nodejs.org/api/perf_hooks.html#performance-measurement-apis) for more information.
```

> To calculate real server-side metrics, consult the documentation of your server-side CMS, framework, or programming language for how to measure performance within the backend application. If your server uses Node.js, the performance measurement APIs will look very familiar to the Performance API in browsers as the Node.js performance module is a subset of the W3C Web Performance APIs as well as additional APIs for Node.js-specific performance measurements. See the [Node.js performance documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/perf_hooks.html#performance-measurement-apis) for more information.

Reviewer: Splitting the long sentence. This part seems to be missing something "as well as additional APIs for Node.js-specific performance measurements."

```suggestion
To calculate real server-side metrics, consult the documentation of your server-side CMS, framework, or programming language for how to measure performance within the backend application. If your server uses Node.js, the performance measurement APIs will look very familiar to the Performance API in browsers. This is because the Node.js performance module is a subset of the W3C Web Performance APIs as well as additional APIs for Node.js-specific performance measurements. See the [Node.js performance documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/perf_hooks.html#performance-measurement-apis) for more information.
```

> To calculate real server-side metrics, consult the documentation of your server-side CMS, framework, or programming language for how to measure performance within the backend application. If your server uses Node.js, the performance measurement APIs will look very familiar to the Performance API in browsers as the Node.js performance module is a subset of the W3C Web Performance APIs as well as additional APIs for Node.js-specific performance measurements. See the [Node.js performance documentation] (https://nodejs.org/api/perf_hooks.html#performance-measurement-apis) for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To calculate real server-side metrics, consult the documentation of your server-side CMS, framework, or programming language for how to measure performance within the backend application. If your server uses Node.js, the performance measurement APIs will look very familiar to the Performance API in browsers as the Node.js performance module is a subset of the W3C Web Performance APIs as well as additional APIs for Node.js-specific performance measurements. See the [Node.js performance documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/perf_hooks.html#performance-measurement-apis) for more information.
```

> Note that there is no clock synchronization between the server, the client and any intermediate proxies. This means that if your server sends timestamps or a `startTime` it might not meaningfully map to the {{domxref("PerformanceEntry.startTime", "startTime")}} of the clients timeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that there is no clock synchronization between the server, the client, and any intermediate proxies. This means that if your server sends timestamps or a `startTime`, the value might not meaningfully map to the {{domxref("PerformanceEntry.startTime", "startTime")}} of the client's timeline.
```

> Once you have calculated your desired metrics, the server needs to send the `Server-Timing` header in its response. See the {{HTTPHeader("Server-Timing")}} reference page for how to send the header in Node.js, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have calculated your desired metrics, the server needs to send the `Server-Timing` header in its response. See the {{HTTPHeader("Server-Timing")}} reference page for an example of how to send the header in Node.js.
```

## Retrieving server metrics

> The server timing metrics usually appear in the developer tools of the browser, but they are also stored as {{domxref("PerformanceServerTiming")}} performance entries which allows you to access them like other [performance data](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Performance_API/Performance_data). However, there are no `"server-timing"` entries on its own. The `PerformanceServerTiming` objects are observable from `"navigation"` and `"resource"` performance entries. You access the server metrics from the {{domxref("PerformanceResourceTiming.serverTiming")}} property which is an array of `PerformanceServerTiming` objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The server timing metrics usually appear in the developer tools of the browser, but they are also stored as {{domxref("PerformanceServerTiming")}} performance entries that you can access like other [performance data](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Performance_API/Performance_data). However, there are no `"server-timing"` entries on their own. The `PerformanceServerTiming` objects are observable from `"navigation"` and `"resource"` performance entries. You access the server metrics from the {{domxref("PerformanceResourceTiming.serverTiming")}} property, which is an array of `PerformanceServerTiming` objects.
```

```js
const observer = new PerformanceObserver((list) => {
  list.getEntries().forEach((entry) => {
    entry.serverTiming.forEach((serverEntry) => {
      console.log(
        `${serverEntry.name} (${serverEntry.description}) duration: ${serverEntry.duration}`
      );
      // Logs "cache (Cache Read) duration: 23.2"
      // Logs "db () duration: 53"
      // Logs "app () duration: 47.2"
    });
  });
});

["navigation", "resource"].forEach((type) =>
  observer.observe({ type, buffered: true })
);
```

## Privacy and security considerations

> The `Server-Timing` header may expose potentially sensitive application and infrastructure information. Consider to control which metrics are returned when and to whom on the server side. For example, you could only show metrics to authenticated users and nothing to the public.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Server-Timing` header may expose potentially sensitive application and infrastructure information. Consider controlling which metrics are returned when and to whom on the server side. For example, you could only show metrics to authenticated users and nothing to the public.
```

> The `Server-Timing` header may expose potentially sensitive application and infrastructure information. Consider controlling which metrics are returned when and to whom on the server side. For example, you could only show metrics to authenticated users and nothing to the public.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Server-Timing` header may expose potentially sensitive application and infrastructure information. Therefore, you need to control when the metrics are returned and to whom on the server side. For example, you could show metrics only to authenticated users and nothing to the public.
```
